I am coming to the conclusion that research is one of the most fundamental skills a developer can have. Most developers focus the entirety of their research on the next big trend. I think an experienced developer eventually learns that there's just too much going on at any given moment to focus 100% of your effort on any one topic. Instead, the seasoned developer just familiarizes themselves with the "big ideas" and what high-level problems a tool is good at solving. When they encounter a problem, they know where to look. Only when they actually need to use that tool on the job do they delve deeper, solidifying their understanding with hands-on experience. But that's not the type of research I am talking about...

The other day I found myself on the IRS website learning why my client needs to display a particular disclaimer for some customers. Now, I didn't need to do this in order to implement the requirement - I was just curious. I think this type of research helps me understand the real-world consequences of my work. Not only that, but I am repeatedly seeing the same terms being used throughout that industry, which just helps to reinforce certain concepts. Now when users explain why they need a certain change, I can understand the importance of that change, legally or otherwise. Heck, I might even anticipate requirements and know to ask *the question* before needing to be told. Instead of it just being an annoying, last-minute enhancement, these changes come with a sense that the project's moving closer to a production-grade solution. My product aligns with reality and *I can appreciate the value being added*.

As a developer, I've found one of the greatest challenges is learning to speak to experts. It seems the more specialized their knowledge, the more difficult it can be to follow along in a conversation (ever try talking to an accountant?). It's our job to distill an overwhelming web of interrelated topics and concerns into a static set of logic a computer can execute.  Figuring out what matters and what doesn't is nothing short of mind-numbing. Then having the courage to keep asking questions, dumb or not, until you're feeling confident... even if you have to be a bit annoying.

Overall, it doesn't do a developer any good to just focus on software and tooling -- take an interest in the industry your working in. It's important to learn to talk in the same language as your experts and users. It switches development from a push-down model (users -> developers) to a more cooperative exercise. Ultimately, as software developers we need recognize that our job is to translate human into computer. Early in your career, it's okay to be a little more focused on the computer side of things. Eventually, you must learn to interact with people, as well. You can't just rattle off low-level, implementation-specific questions -- you have to know what questions to ask and that means sparking up a dialogue. It's all part of learning to do research.

Personally, I'm slowly beginning to enjoy the human side of my job more than the computer side...